                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Relay-Version: version B 2.10 5/3/83; site utzoo.UUCP
Posting-Version: Notesfiles $Revision: 1.6.2.14 $; site siemens.UUCP
Path: utzoo!watmath!clyde!burl!ulysses!allegra!princeton!eosp1!siemens!bea
From: b...@siemens.UUCP
Newsgroups: net.sources
Subject: Dhrystone benchmark, part 1 pkk, paa
Message-ID: <28600001@siemens.UUCP>
Date: Thu, 15-Nov-84 09:20:00 EST
Article-I.D.: siemens.28600001
Posted: Thu Nov 15 09:20:00 1984
Date-Received: Fri, 16-Nov-84 05:32:59 EST
Lines: 279
Nf-ID: #N:siemens:28600001:000:12017
Nf-From: siemens!bea    Nov 15 09:20:00 1984




          MEASUREMENTS WITH THE "DHRYSTONE" BENCHMARK PROGRAM
                            - USER'S GUIDE -

                          REINHOLD P. WEICKER

                              OCTOBER 1984



1. Introduction


For  "Communication of the ACM", I wrote a paper "Dhrystone: A Synthetic
Systems Programming Benchmark" which appeared in the  October  issue  of
the  journal  (vol.  27,  no.  10,  Oct. 1984, p. 1013-1030).  The paper
consists of two main parts: First, statistical data  about  the  use  of
programming  language  features  (especially  in  the  area  of  systems
programming) are summarized, and second, a synthetic benchmark  program,
written in Ada, is given that is based on these data.

I  am posting the program here in Usenet for those who are interested in
using  the  "Dhrystone"  benchmark  program  for  measurements.      The
distribution consists of four parts:

   - Part  1  is  this  paper  (user's guide) containing hints that
     should be taken into account when  the  program  is  used  for
     benchmarking,

   - Part 2 is the program (reference version) in Ada,

   - Part 3 is the program (measurement version) in Pascal,

   - Part 4 is the program (measurement version) in C. 

A  "reference"  version  contains  just  the program text, together with
comments on the statistics, a "measurement" version is a versions  where
statements  for  execution  time  measurement  have  been inserted.  See
section 4 for more details on measurement methods.

In the case of Ada, the "reference" versions contains the  program  text
as  published.  In  the  cases  of Pascal and C, reference versions (not
distributed here) contain an equivalent program text in these languages.
See the publication for remarks on  language  issues  that  have  to  be
considered when the program is translated to languages other than Ada.

In  the  "measurement"  versions,  some  statements (those accessing the
operating  system  clock)  are  implementation-dependent.   The   sample
measurement version given here can be used on Berkeley UNIX systems (4.2
bsd).    Of  course,  for measurements on other systems these statements
have to be changed according to the language library routines  available
on these systems.

The  program  versions distributed via Usenet contain the program in one
file per programming language, I didn't want to flood the net  with  too
many  versions or with too many small units.  However, the understanding
is that the program (Ada and C versions)  consists  of  several  modules
(compilation units) that can be compiled separately; see section 3 for a
discussion  of  compilation  and linkage issues (program in one file vs.
program in several files).  Versions with the source program in  several
files  can be obtained easily by "cutting" the program into parts at the
obvious locations.  In the case of C, suitable "#include" statements and
an "extern" declaration need to be added.

Similarly, the reference versions for Pascal and C can be obtained  from
the  files  sent  via Usenet by removing the statements for measurement,
the I/O statements and the loops around the main procedure.



2. Errors / Inconsistencies


There are two minor inconsistencies in  the  published  version  of  the
program  which  were detected too late for a correction in the published
version:

   - In the comment at the  beginning  of  the  function  body  for
     Func_2,  the  beginning  of  the  string  literal  should read
     "DHRYSTONE PROGRAM, ..." instead of "DHRYSTONE, ..." for  both
     String_Par_In_1 and String_Par_In_2.

     The  code  is correct, just the comment text is incorrect; the
     two strings are  different  in  the  20th,  not  in  the  12th
     character.

   - It  can  be  argued  that  the  first "if" statement in Func_2
     should have been formulated

       if Char_Loc >= 'W' and then Char_Loc < 'Z'

     rather than

       if Char_Loc >= 'W' and Char_Loc < 'Z'

     since a programmer  writing  such  a  program  would  only  be
     interested  in  the  value  of  the "if" condition as a whole,
     there is no need to evaluate "Char_Loc < 'Z'" if "Char_Loc  >=
     'W'" evaluates to "false" (however, it doesn't hurt either).

     In the C version of the program, I used for this statement the
     operator "&&" (and-then) rather than "&" since in C, different
     from  Ada and Pascal, "&" forces the compiler to interpret the
     result as integer (there is no data type boolean in C) and  to
     apply  a  bitwise  "and"  operation.   However, I left the Ada
     version as published since I didn't want to change the program
     after publication, even if there is now a slight inconsistency
     between the Ada and the C version.



3. Compilation and Linkage Issues


3.1. Ada Version

The "Dhrystone" program in its original (Ada) version  consists  of  six
library  units  in  the  sense  of Ada: Two packages (Pack_1 and Pack_2)
consisting of both specification and body, one package (Global_Def) with
specification only, and one subprogram (Main). The package structure  is
intended since this is the natural way for programming in Ada.

As  far  as benchmarking and execution times are concerned, there can be
systems where calls and data accesses  across  package  boundaries  have
execution times different from those within a package.  In addition, the
execution  time  may  depend  upon  the  way the program is compiled and
executed; there are two possible ways:


   1. the six units are compiled  separately  and  linked  together
      later,

   2. the  six  units  are  submitted to the compiler in one source
      file.


For many Ada systems there will be no difference in execution  time,  as
far  as  the  two  compilation  models are concerned.  However, for some
machines there may be a difference since different  representations  may
be  used  for  addresses  (e.g.,  16  bit  or  32 bit), depending on the
compilation and linkage model used.

If there is a difference in execution time, the times  for  both  models
should be measured; model (1) is the one that corresponds more to actual
software  development.  Ada  was  explicitly designed for large software
projects that use separate compilation.


3.2. C Version

C  does not have a package structure similar to Ada, but it has features
for independent compilation. Therefore, the same consideration apply  as
described above for Ada.

The  program  structure of the C version is assumed to be similar to the
Ada version, with the difference that there  is  no  separation  between
specification  and  body,  and  that "main" and "Proc_0" can be the same
procedure.  There are three modules, where module  1  contains  constant
definitions  and  type  declarations  only,  and  the  two other modules
contain the executable routines of the program:


   - Module 2 contains the global variables  and  procedures  main,
     Proc_1, ..., Proc_5.

   - Module   3   contains  procedures  Proc_6,  ...,  Proc_8,  and
     functions Func_1, ... Func_3.


If they are compiled separately, these  modules  use  an  "#include"  to
refer to the module with the global definitions.


3.3. Pascal Version

Although   many   Pascal   systems   provide  features  for  independent
compilation, this is not part of the  ISO  or  ANSI  language  standard.
Therefore it is not possible to formulate a portable Pascal version with
several  modules,  and this set contains only a version with the program
in one source file.


4. Measurement


4.1. Method of Measurement

For measuring the  execution  time,  I  have  prepared  (Pascal  and  C)
versions  of  the program which use the normal method:  The program text
between the comments "Start timer" and "Stop timer"  is  enclosed  in  a
loop,  and  the  loop  is  executed  often  enough  that the time can be
measured.  (Problems with respect to a cache have been discussed in  the
publication.)  To  get  an  exact result, the execution time of the same
number of empty loops is subtracted.

On  a  single-user  system,  the  output  statements  inserted  in   the
measurement  versions  can  be used to measure the elapsed time manually
with  a stopwatch.  On a multi-user system, this obviously does not give
the expected result unless it is guaranteed that  no  other  process  is
running   on   the  system.    Fortunately,  most  programming  language
implementations provide a call to a runtime library  function  with  the
name  "clock",  "runtime",  or similar that returns the process-specific
clock, measured in some time unit.

I used the subroutines "clock" (Pascal) and "times" (C) for measurements
on a VAX 11/780 running Berkeley UNIX  (4.2  bsd).    It  seems  that  a
certain  degree  of  inaccuracy cannot be avoided due to inaccuracies in
the operating  system  clock,  influences  of  time  slicing,  different
mappings  of pages to physical memory, etc.  As an example, Berkely UNIX
gives for C the value of the clock in two parts, "user time" and "system
time". Although the program does  not  execute  any  explicit  operating
system  calls  between  the measurement points, the system time is not 0
(it usually lies between 2 and 5 % of the user time).  For Pascal,  only
a time called "user time" is available.


4.2. Control of Results

When  the  program is entered into the computer manually, care should be
taken  that  no  typing  errors  occur;  there  is  no   straightforward
indication  that  the  program  executes  exactly  the  statements it is
supposed to execute.  I didn't see a reasonable way to have the  program
compute result values that can be checked easily, while at the same time
maintaining   the   complicated   balance  with  regard  to  statements,
operators, data types etc.  For  control  purposes,  I  usually  made  a
special version with output statements that allows to follow the flow of
control.    Assertions about the values of variables are provided in the
form of comments in the program,  and  the  following  chart  shows  the
dynamic procedure call chain:

    Main
        P0
           P5 P4 F2    P7 P8 P1                F1 F1 P2
                    F1          P3    P6    P7
                                   P7    F3


4.3. Documentation of Results

In  stating  results,  the  configuration used for measurement should be
described as detailed as possible.  Relevant data are: Machine  version,
language,  compiler  version,  compile  options (e.g. "optimize" option,
runtime checks  enabled  or  not).    With  microprocessors,  the  clock
frequency  and the memory system characteristics (number of wait states)
are necessary for meaningful comparisons.  In the case of C,  it  should
be included whether the "register" attribute has been used, and to which
variables  it  was  applied.  (According to my experiences with Berkeley
UNIX C on a VAX 11/780, the times differed somewhat, though not much.)


5. Correspondence


For  people who want to make measurements with the program and who don't
have access to Usenet, I have prepared  floppy  disks  with  the  source
files,  the  data  are:  Standard size 8", single-sided, double density,
written on an Intel 86/330 in RMX format; these floppy disks are sent in
exchange for an empty floppy disk.  (However, this  will  be  irrelevant
for you, the reader of this note posted on Usenet.)

If  you  make  measurements  with the program - whether you obtained the
source file via Usenet, via floppy disk or by re-typing it  -,  I  would
appreciate  very  much  if  you  could  send  me  the  results  of  your
measurements.  I plan to make a comprehensive list of these results  for
different  machines  and  compilers and, in the first months of 1985, to
send this list to all who contributed to it.

For US mail, please use the address

Reinhold P. Weicker
Siemens Corporate Research and Technology
105 College Road East
Princeton, NJ 08540

For electronic mail via UUCP, the address (at present) is

...{ihnp4,allegra,decvax}!ogcvax!inteloa!weicker
